Thesis Title  Quantum Random Walk on A  Number Line Implementation on Different Simulators with Wall- Time Benchmarking  
Thesis Credits   12 
Candidate   Mr. Warat Puengtambol  
Thesis Advisor  Dr. Unchalisa Taetragool  
Program   Master of Engineering  
Field of Study   Computer Engineering 
Department   Computer Engineering 
Faculty   Engineering 
Academic Year  2020 
Abstract  
Since a classical computer has a limitation to solve a large size of data and complex 
problems, researchers have be en trying to find new solutions. Q uantum computing is one 
of them. A number of quantum algorithms have been invented. Some of them were 
theoretically proved that they could solve problems faster than their classical versions. 
According to the literature review, a quantum random walk has various advantages. 
Moreover, it can be a tool to construct other quantum algorithms. In this thesis, the one -
dimensional quantum random walk is studied. Then, the quantum random walk circuit is 
implemented. Forest from Rigetti and Qiskit from IBM, which are quantum programming 
platforms, are explored. Two experiments are conducted. First, the circuits are examined 
on quantum computer simulators from IBM and Rigetti. The sizes of the circuits are 4, 5, 
6, and 7- qubits position state s. For each size, the circuit is constructed with 5 different 
types of shift operators. The results show that computing wall -time from IBM’s qua ntum 
computer simulator is significantly lower than Rigetti’s quantum computer simulator for 
the same size and circuit type. Moreover, on the same circuit type, a positive linear 
relationship between the computing wall -time and the circuit depth is presented. Second, 
the same circuit sizes and types from the first experiment were deployed on an actual 
IBM quantum computer, named ibmq_16_melbourne . However, the returned result is 
only for the 4- qubit position state. The other sizes of position state s return error due to 
the capacity of the quantum computer. Furthermore, the returned measurement results are 
disturbed by the noise from the operation of the actual quantum computer. 
Keywords: 
Circuit_Depth, Computing_Wall-Time, Quantum_Random_Walk, Quantum_Computer_Simulator  