Thesis Title         A Synthetic Minority Based on Probabilistic Distribution (SyMProD) Oversampling for Imbalanced Datasets 
Thesis Credits     12 
Candidate            Mr. Intouch Kunakorntum 
Thesis Advisor    Asst. Prof. Phond Phunchongharn, Ph.D.  
Program              Master of Engineering 
Field of Study     Computer Engineering 
Department         Computer Engineering 
Faculty                Engineering 
Academic Year   2019 Imbalanced_Dataset, Machine_Learning, Oversampling, 
Abstract 
Handling an imbalanced class problem is a challenging task in real-world applications. 
This problem affects various prediction models that predict only the majority classes and 
fail to identify the minority classes because of the skewed data. The oversampling 
technique is one of the exciting solutions that handles the imbalanced class problem. 
However, several existing oversampling methods do not consider the distribution of the 
target variable and cause an overlapping class problem. Therefore, this study introduces 
a new oversampling technique, namely Synthetic Minority Based on Probabilistic 
Distribution (SyMProD), to handle skewed datasets. Our method normalizes data using a 
Z-score and removes noisy data. Then, the proposed method selects minority samples 
based on the probability distribution of both classes. The synthetic instances are generated 
from the selected points and several minority nearest neighbors. Our technique aims to 
create synthetic instances that cover the minority class distribution, avoid the noise 
generation, and reduce the possibilities of overlapping classes and overgeneralization 
problems. Our proposed technique is validated using 17 benchmark datasets and three 
classifiers. Moreover, this study compares the performance of the method with other eight 
conventional oversampling algorithms. The empirical results show that our method 
achieves better performance than other oversampling techniques. 
Keywords:    
Classification, Probabilistic_Distribution  