Thesis Title  Solving Vehicle Routing Problem with Hard Time Windows by 
Genetic Algorithm

In the logistic management, the cost reduction for delivering the  goods to customer s is crucial 
to save the budget of the company . Since decades ago, various Vehicle Routing Problems  
(VRPs ) have been emerged enormously to improve the productivity and to reduce the logistic 
cost of the industry . Among them, Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows  (VRPTW ) 
is one of the most fundamental VRP variants and one of the most applicable variants in the 
real-world case studies. In this study , VRPTW with  hard time windows is solved  by 
developing a special Genetic Algorithm (GA), composed of a problem -specific crossover 
operator and seven different mutation operators. The proposed GA has better results with  the 
heuristic mutation among seven operators while exploring the new and better features in large 
search space. The results of the algorithm are tested on the popular Solomon benchmark 100 -
customer datasets. The results show that the proposed GA is quite comparable  with the best -
known solutions on the C set of Solomon benchmark and even better than the best -known 
solutions on the R and RC sets. The motivation behind this research is to find a new problem -
specific configurations of GA for VRP TW domain which can have the desirable outputs that 
can be applied in most of the real -world use cases.  
 
 Artificial Intelligence  / Combinatorial Optimization  / Vehicle Routing Problem  
/ Hard Time Windows  / Meta -heuristic  / Genetic Algorithm   

VRP     =  Vehicle Routing Problem  
TSP    =   Travelling Salesman Problem  
VRPP    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Profits  
TOP     =   Team Orienteering Problem  
CTOP    =   Capacitated Team Orienteering Problem  
TOPTW    =   Team Orienteering Problem with Time Windows  
VRPDP    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Delivery and Pickup  
VRPLIFO    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with LIFO (stack fashion)  
CVRP    =   Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem  
VRPTW    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows  
VRPHTW    =  Vehicle Routing Problem with Hard Time Windows  
VRPSTW    =  Vehicle Routing Problem with Soft Time Windows  
VRPMT    =  Vehicle Routing Problem with Multiple Trips  
OVRP    =   Open Vehicle Routing Problem  
IRP     =   Inventory Routing Problem  
MDVRP    =   Multi -Depot Vehicle Routing Problem  
MDVRPTW   =   Multiple Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time    
Windows  
HFVRP    =   Heterogeneous Fleet Vehicl e Routing Problem  
FSMVRP    =   Fleet Size Mix Vehicle Routing Problem  
VRPSDP    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Delivery and  
Pickup  
VRPSDPSTW   =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Delivery and  
Pickup with Soft Time Windows  
VRPB    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Backhauling  
VRPMDP    =   Vehicle Routing Problem with Mixed Delivery and Pickup  
AI     =   Artificial Intelligence  
SI     =   Swarm Intelligence  
GA     =   Genetic Algorithm   ix 
ACO    =   Ant Colony Optimization  
PSO      =   Particle Swarm Optimization  
RL     =   Reinforcement Learning  
TD    =  Temporal Difference  

This chapter completely explains about the research by describing the problem statement, 
mathematical model of the problem, objective, motivation,  and hypothesis to conduct this 
research. Furthermore, overview of research methodology of the work is also introduced.  
 
1.1 Problem Background  
Since from the earlier days of 1950s, the decision makers in large corporations had tried to 
achieve an incredible improvement and growth in the organizational complexity related 
managements together with the rapid industrial revolution. To manage the orga nizational 
workflow efficiently and effectively, one related problem has risen . A problem of increasing 
the complexities in organization workflow, that is, the difficulty to allocate the available 
resources to the work processes efficiently and to plan or accomplish the work activities as 
well as operations of the organization effectively for gaining more benefits. Beginning from 
that moment, Operations Research  (OR) studies were gradually carried out as a solution for 
the above -mentioned problem.  
 
It has been widely applied in different organizations in these areas such as government and 
military, educational institutions, transportation, manufacturing, constructions, financial 
institutions, health care units and public services. In general, conducting the  operations 
research includes the following steps:  
- Observing the problem  
- Formulating or modeling the problem  
- Solving the problem  
- Evaluating the solutions  
 
Combinatorial optimization is a sub -area of mathematical optimization which is connecting 
with operat ion research. This topic has many different applications in real -world such as 
logistics and supply chains, resource allocations and distribution networks. optimization 
since from the decades ago. Those are the optimization problems where the possible solu tions 
can be driven using combinatorics such as sets, subsets, combinations,  or permutations and  11 
the graph theory such as vertices and edges. The term “combinatorial” refers to item 
orderings. Popular examples include Traveling Salesman Problem  (TSP)  which finds an 
optimal ordering of the cities that a salesman should visit but the total distance travelled of 
the route should be minimum. Several computer science related  fields such as Artificial 
Intelligence  (AI), machine learning and evolutionary com puting which are the subfields of 
AI, applied mathematics which gives the exact solutions for the specified problem have been 
active research fields for the combinatorial optimization.  
 
Vehicle Routing Problem  (VRP)  is the type of combinatorial optimizatio n. The problem asks,  
“What is the set of optimal ordering of the customers that a set of vehicles should visit in 
order to deliver the goods,  but the total travel cost of the routes should be minimum?" VRP 
generalizes the traditional TSP as it has many tra veling salesmen  which are vehicles in this 
context and more sophisticated constraints for choosing the optimal route for each vehicle. 
The Vehicle Routing Problem was firstly introduced in [2].  
 
There are many variants of VRP models which are used for dif ferent problems depending on 
the specific constraints. Some of the well -known problems from  the previous works include:  
- VRP  – Vehicle Routing Problem. It only has vehicle capacity constraint.  
- VRPTW  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows. It has both v ehicle 
capacity and time constraints.  
- HVRP  – Heterogeneous Vehicle Routing Problem. The vehicles used in this problem 
have different capacities and types.  
- MDVRP  – Multi -Depot Vehicle Routing Problem. This problem has multiple depots 
(warehouses). It has ve hicle capacity constraint.  
- MDVRPTW  – Multi -Depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows. It is 
MDVRP with time constraint.  
- VRPDP  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Delivery and Pickup. This problem has 
both the delivery of goods from the depot to the custo mers and pickup of the goods 
from the customers to the depot. It has vehicle capacity constraint.  
- VRPDPTW  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Delivery and Pickup with Time 
Windows. It is VRPDP with time constraint.   12 
- VRPSDP  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Simulta neous Delivery and Pickup. It is 
an extension of VRPDP but the delivery and pickup happen at the same time at each 
customer. It has vehicle capacity constraint.  
- VRPSDPTW  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Delivery and Pickup 
with Time Windows. It is VRPSDP with time constraint.  
- VRPSDPSTW  – Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Delivery and Pickup 
with Soft Time Windows. It is VRPSDPTW with adjustable time constraint.  
 
Throughout the decades, different solution approaches have been proposed for the VRP  
variants  by various researchers. These methods can be categorized into four big groups:  
1) Exact algorithms  
2) Heuristics algorithms  
3) Meta -heuristics algorithms  
4) Hybrid algorithms  
 
In this study, a well -known meta -heuristic Genetic Algorit hm (GA) is proposed to solve the 
VRPTW variant. In -depth of VRPTW is discussed in the section 1.2 and chapter 2 . The 
proposed GA is explained in chapter 3.  
 
1.2 Mathematical Formulation of the Problem  
VPRTW can be formulated into a mathematical model as follow s: 
 
  14 
Equation 1 .1 is the objective function used to minimize the total distance traveled by all 
vehicles without exceeding each vehicle’s capacity within customer preferred time windows. 
Equation 1.2 specifies each route must start from a depot and ends at that depot. Equation 
1.3 represents the number of vehicles at the depot which indirectly means the number of 
routes at that depot. Equation 1.4 defines that each customer can be only visited once by one 
of the vehicles from the depot. Equation 1.5 constrains the same vehicle must arrive and 
departs from that customer. Equation 1.6 shows that the demand at each customer in each 
route of the vehicle must be less than or equal to the vehicle’s capacit y. Equation 1.7 
constrains that the vehicle cannot arrive before the earliest arrival time and cannot be later 
than the latest arrival time.  
 
1.4 Overview of the Research Methodology  
Meta -heuristics algorithms have significantly gained interest from many researchers for 
solving VRP. Among them, G A based meta -heuristics are popular for having the good quality 
results. Because of the nature of GA’s performance in global search space, it is picked as the 
solution for most of the VRP variants . Here, new problem -specific crossover operator and 
seven different mutat ions are introduced to solve a VRPTW variant on the well -known 
Solomon benchmarks.  
 
1.5 Objectives of the Research  
There was much  research  published on VRP TW. Researchers solve the problem in different 
approaches over decades. This r esearch has the follow ing objectives to fulfill : 
- Contribute to the active GA research area specifically for the VRPTW.  
- Reduce the travel cost of all routes that cover all customers . 
- Increase the vehicle utilization . 
 
1.6 Motivation to Conduct the Research  
VRP is a popular prob lem from combinatorial optimization field. Among them , VRPTW is 
the most fundamental variant for all variants as it has vehicle capacity constraint and time 
constraint, mostly fit into the real -world problems. Therefore, the  motivation behind this 
research  is to find a new  simple but  problem -specific configurations of GA for VRP TW  15 
domain which can have the desirable outputs that can be applied in most of the real -world 
use cases . 
 
1.7 Research Hypothesis  
Hypothesis of this research is to state that the new proposed genetic operators of  the GA  can 
have good  results for the VRPTW  problem especially on the customers with random  (not 
clustered) locations  which have many similar use cases in the real -world .    
 
1.8 Technical Requirements for Implementatio n 
For implementation  of this research, Python 3.7.2 , Visual Studio Code editor and Google 
Colab runtime environment  are used. The proposed GA is implemented from the scratch in 
Python.  
 
1.9 Organization of this Research   
This researc h is organized as follows: Chapter 1 discusses the background  and statement of 
the problem, objectives and motivation of the research, hypothesis of the research, technical 
requirements to implement the problem . Chapter 2 provides the detailed review over the 
previous works on problem set, solution methods and datasets . Chapter 3 is about the 
methodology that is used to implement this research and finally Chapter 4 is concluded with 
the results and conclusion for this report. CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
This chapter is comprised of the previous related works, surveys and articles contributed by 
other resea rchers on variants of VRP, VRPTW , benchmark datasets, solution approaches for 
the variants, genetic algorithm and reinforcement learning based approache s. 
 
2.1 VRP Variants  
In the set of combinatorial optimization problems which can be solved by linear integer 
programming models, VRP is a kind of the problem which considers the optimal cost for 
each of the route that is planned for each vehicle used to deliver goods to the se t of customers. 
The problem was first described in [2]. The paper solved the problem between the fleet of 
trucks for the delivery of gasoline, the terminal and a large set of gasoline stations. They 
proposed the problem of VRP as the generalization of trad itional TSP. According to the 
paper, the traditional TSP has only one salesman while the complex VRP has multiple 
salesmen and additional constraints.  
 
There are several variants of VRP depending on the constraints of the problem. As it is 
described in [1 ], VRPP, TOP, CTOP, TOPTW, VRPDP, VRPLIFO, CVRP, CVRPTW, 
VRPMT, OVRP and IRP are some of the variants of VRP. Moreover, there are also MDVRP, 
MDVRPTW described in [3]. A comprehensive and organized survey [3] that presented most 
of the VRP variants which w ere categorized into respective constraints that came from 
relative domains. It also summed up the different categories of solution approaches to the 
variants and a collection of benchmark datasets and real -world case studies as well.  
 
Additionally, VRP f or big cities have some distinct natures according to [4]. The paper 
summarized the constraints, models and solution approaches for VRP in urban areas grouped 
by different roles of stakeholders, namely, shipper, carrier, resident and administrator. The 
evolution of the research of VRP was visualized in [4] by organizing the variants of VRP 
into different groups respective to their research timelines. The paper reviewed on the city 
logistics and pointed out the six main characteristics of City VRP. Among the m, traffic  17 
regulations and fast response were the example of characteristics that need to have sufficient 
studies in the future.  
  
As the authors mentioned in [3], the variations in the type of vehicles used for the problem 
was also considered as the vari ants of VRP. There are two variations in terms of vehicles, 
namely, homogeneous fleet and heterogeneous fleet. For a specific VRP, the former uses the 
identical type of vehicles which have the same capacities while the latter uses the different 
type of veh icles which also have different capacities. If the fleet in VRP used is the 
heterogeneous type, there are two main cla ssifications: HFVRP and FSMVRP in [5]. The 
additional constraints such as, capacity, time windows, number of depots, number of 
products, n umber of trips and symmetry of routes can be added into the problem according 
to the requirement.  
 
Relating to handling the robust and stochastic approaches to uncertainty in heterogeneous 
fleet VRPs, [5] discussed the challenges from the academic to busi ness sectors and the 
potential research areas by stating that VRP variants that is relating with product restriction, 
zone restriction, customer restriction and vehicle restriction are missing from the current 
research areas. The two case studies of HFVRP on LPG distributi on sectors are discussed in 
[6] and [7]. The former paper considered CVRP with variable cost for the industry in Turkey 
and the latter one was on VRPSDP in Northern district of Kerala. [39] proposed a customized 
Tabu Search model for VRPSD P and [40] discussed about the case study of VRPSDP for 
cold-chain logistic.    
 
2.2 VRPTW  
Since the previous section was reviewed on most of the variants of VRP, this section is aimed 
to be reviewed on the specific type of VRP which is the problem that is proposed to solve in 
this research , VRP TW. The purpose of the VRPTW is to deliver goods to each customer 
within the customer preferred time windows without violating the capacity of the vehicle. 
According to [43], There are two types of VRPTW, namely, VRPH TW (Vehicle Routing 
Problem with Hard Time Windows and VRPSTW (Vehicle Routing Problem with Soft Time 
Windows)  [41] and [42] . VRPHTW strictly constrains the vehicle to arrive within the time  18 
windows . Violation is not allowed. However, in VRPSTW, the time w indows can be violated 
that means it allows the vehicle to after earlier or later than the customer preferred time. In 
that case, the penalty value for constraint violation balances the problem. The greater the 
penalty value is, the harder the constraint b ecomes. The penalty value of infinity makes 
VRPSTW to be equivalent with  VRPHTW.  
 
Many research have been flourished on VRPTW using both of exact algorithms, heuristics 
and meta -heuristics. Among them, popular approaches were with GA and Tabu Search. [34],  
[35] and [36] proposed hybrid GA approach for VRPTW on Solomon benchmarks while [37] 
proposed GA with local post -optimization procedures. The survey [8] concluded that 
different GA algorithms which yielded the good solutions are in the hybridization with route 
construction heuristics or local search.  
 
2.3 Benchmark Datasets and Case -study Datasets  
Datasets are essential to evaluate the results which are driven from the solution method th at 
is implemented. [3] classified the types of datasets for VRP into two groups: datasets with 
symmetric routes and asymmetric routes. In symmetric routes dataset, the back and forth 
distances between two locations are the same. That distance can be computed as Euclidean 
distance. Compared to symmetric routes, distances between two locations can be different in 
each opposite direction or some routes may not even exist in one -way lanes. In general, most 
of the symmetric datasets are benchmark datasets while the asymmetric data sets are the real -
world case study datasets.  
 
In real -world case study studies datasets, there are different constraints in different case 
studies. Moreover, the datasets cannot be shared for future studies because some data are 
confidential in the perspe ctives of industries. Therefore, there is no common or standard 
dataset for assuring which solution approach is better. That is the reason why researchers 
choose benchmark datasets to prove their methods are eligible in the comparison with other 
methods as  the benchmarks are the small sized, sharable, test datasets with BKS (best known 
solution). BKS value is the standard value for them to prove the effectiveness and efficiency 
of their implemented solution methods. According to many researchers, the benchm ark  19 
datasets should be the first work in VRP for the pro posed solution methods [3]. After 
achieving the satisfied results, those methods can then be applied to real -world case study 
datasets.  
 
Benchmark datasets for different variants of VRP can be obtained from various websites. 
Among them, http://www.vrp -rep.org/ which is a collaborative open -data platform for 
sharing vehicle routing problem benchmark instances and solutions [23]. Also from 
https://neo.lcc.uma.es/vrp/ , the NEO Research group works at the Department of LCC from 
the University of Malaga (Spain) [24].  
 
2.4 Solomon Benchmark for VRPTW variant  
For using Solomon benchmark [ 38], Solomon assumed that distance travelled and travel tim e 
between two customers are the same. The author generated six problem sets which are 
described as C1, R1, RC1, C2, R2 and RC2. The geographical data in C sets are generated 
into clusters and the R sets are randomly generated while the RC sets are the comb ination of 
C and R sets. Type 1 and 2 describes the difference in width of time windows of the problems 
and also the vehicle capacity for the vehicles used in each problem. Type 1 has narrow time 
windows and small vehicle capacity while Type 2 has wide tim e windows and large vehicle 
capacity. Therefore, solutions of Type 1 have small number of customers per route 
approximately (5 to 10) so that there are more vehicles to be used. Solutions of Type2 have 
larger number of customers per route  approximately (mo re than 30) according to [ 38]. 
 
2.5 Different Approaches for Solving VRP variants  
Since VRP is a kind of operation research, the key objective for conducting the research is to 
achieve the optimized: minimized or maximized outcomes for the logistics domain . 
Throughout the decades, many algorithms have been proposed as the solution approaches for 
solving variants of VRP. Thus, considering the appropriate solution method for specific 
problem of VRP is important to achieve the desired results. The algorithms u sed as solution 
approaches for variants of VRP can be grouped into four categories; exact algorithms, 
heuristics algorithms, meta -heuristics algorithms and hybrid algorithms. The two  20 
comprehen sive surveys [3] and [8] gathered the previous works on each cat egory of solution 
approach and reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of approaches.  
 
Exact algorithms are mathematical solutions for solving VRP. They are capable of providing 
the exact optimal solution to the problem. According to [3] and [8], most of th e well -known 
exact algorithms used to solve for VRP are: Brand -And-Bound, B ranch -And-Cut, Branch -
And-Price [12] and Set Partitioning [13]. However, VRP is NP -hard combinatorial 
optimization problem whose computation time increases intolerably with the size  of problem. 
If we have n customers to deliver the goods, the total number of possible combinations of 
routes to plan is (n -1)!. Therefore, using exact algorithms has limitations to solve this kind 
of problem as they are very time -consuming and not suitabl e for larger VRP instances as 
described in [8], [14].  
 
Because of limitations in exact algorithms for large problems, the later research focuses were 
directed to heuristics algorithms. Neighborhood search, Integer Programming models, 
Scatter Search algori thms, Sweep Algorithm that were described in [3] and [8] are examples 
of heuristics algorithms. They are approximate methods which are not the same as exact 
solutions that can guarantee the optimality. The solution from the heuristics algorithms 
cannot gua rantee the optimality but they are acceptable and close to optimality in the 
reasonable amount of computation time. As every method has vulnerability [3], the heuristics 
algorithms are only capable to search the acceptable solutions in small search space.  
 
In order to fill up the gap in heuristics algorithms, meta -heuristics algorithms were developed 
to find the solution of the problem in larger search space. We can also say that meta -heuristics 
algorithms are the ones which can guide heuristics algorithms in the larger search space. 
Meta -heuristics algorithms can avoid from being stuck at local optimum. There are two types 
of meta -heuristics algorithms: local search -based and population -based as in [3]. Simulated 
Annealing [15], [16], Tabu Search of [17] ar e local -based meta -heuristic and Genetic 
Algorithm [26], [27], Evolutionary Algorithm of [20] is a population -based meta -heuristic 
examples. Nature -inspired algorithms are also in the group of population -based. Swarm 
Intelligence (SI) algorithms including Particle Swarm Optimization of [21], Ant Colony  21 
Optimization [18], [19] Bat Algorithm, Firefly Algorithm are kind of nature -inspired 
algorithms which have high efficiency and give better results to solve VRP.  
 
Hybrid algorithms were introduced due to the limitations in each above category of 
approaches. Rather than solving with one algorithm and having ineffectiveness in the 
method, applying the combination of two or more exact, heuristics or meta -heuristics 
algorithms to produce more reliable solution bec ame the modern research focus for 
researchers. During the recent past years, the implementation of GA improved by 
hybridization with other algorithms has given the better solutions for VRPTW [8]. According 
to [3], the recent research potential was on hybri dization of two meta -heuristics: non -nature -
inspired and nature -inspired, for example, GA with ACO in [22] or GA with PSO in [45], 
[46] and [47].  
 
2.6 Genetic Algorithm  based Approaches  
GA (Genetic Algorithm) is a meta -heuristic method that is in the cate gory of population -
based search having the objective of applying the principles of biological evolution, natural 
selection, recombination of the genes which inspires the survival of the fittest theory from 
Charles Darwin to integrate this theory into the a rtificial systems. In 1975, it has been 
introduced by [43]. It has gained high interest from a number of researchers in different fields. 
Because of its adaptation to the environment in global search space, the solutions that can be 
driven from the GA can have better results than traditional approaches. In this section, pure 
and hybrid GA methods that were applied to the VRP variants are represented.  
 
While reviewing the previous related works, pure or hybrid GA applied applications were 
categorized into t wo groups:  
- In some multiple depot VRP, the customers were assigned to the nearest or optimal 
depot first [26], [27]. And then assign the appropriate group of customers to each 
vehicle at the depot and later GA was used to find the best combination of the route 
among the possible total routes of the assigned vehicle, which covered the all 
customers to deliver [25], [30]. This type of configuration is suitable when the number  22 
of vehicles are limited and not seek the cost saving benefit from reducing the numb er 
of vehicles.  
- Applying GA directly to the problem set by allocating the depots and the vehicles to 
the feasible customers who were ordered in the gene representation of each 
individual, according to the constraints of the problem [26], [27], [28], [29]. This type 
of configuration is suitable when the number of vehicles are unlimited. This can have 
the vehicle insufficient problem if it is applied to the limited vehicle problem. 
Because all customers to deliver in the plan may not be covered by the predefi ned 
number of vehicles. In this case, the similar concept as the penalty function for time 
windows approach which was mentioned in section 2.3 will be required.  
 
The GA has its own operators to achieve the improvement process for the solutions over 
time. Based on the different set ups of operators which were generally used in GA for VRP, 
a comprehensive review was discussed in [11]. The following list provides the summary from 
the review of [11].  
- Chromosome Representation  – permutation representation , direct representation, 
path representation and binary representation.  
- Initial Population  – randomly generating, using heuristics, using both heuristics and 
randomly generating.  
- Fitness Function  – equation for the total travel distance that is evaluated to achieve 
the smaller value at times.  
- Selection  – roulette wheel selection, rank -based selection, tournament selection and 
uniform selection, elitism.  
- Crossover  – one-point crossover (1PX), two -point crossover (2PX), order crossover 
(OX), partially mapped  crossover (PMX), cyclic crossover (CX), route based 
crossover (RBX), sequence base crossover (SBX), single parent crossover (SPO), 
genetic vehicle representation crossover (GVR), best cost best route crossover 
(BCBRC).  
- Mutation  – swap mutation (SWM), inve rsion mutation (INVM), insertion mutation 
(INSM), reallocation mutation (RAM), exchange mutation (EXM), reposition 
mutation (RPM).   23 
- Termination Condition  – maximum number of generation where max generation 
equals number of explored chromosomes divided by po pulation size, other stopping 
conditions like no improvement over generations.  
- Parameter Selection  – population size > 10, crossover rate as a continuous number 
between 0 and 1, mutation rate as a continuous number between 0 and 1.  
 
From the initial popula tion set up from that review, using heuristics to generate the initial 
population of GA becomes the part of hybrid GA. Hybrid algorithms for VRP normally have 
two parts: route construction and route improvement as described in [31]. Route construction 
meth ods starts with a customer who is chosen randomly and subsequent customer which has 
minimum travel cost from the first one is chosen continuously until all the customers are 
covered and the route is completed. Route improvement methods starts with a given complete 
route and then modify the route by recombining or introducing different link to obtain the 
minimum travel cost.  
 
Some researchers [31], [32] who have been conducting the research of hybrid GA on VRP 
used one heuristic as a route construction meth od and fed the initial routes that was obtained 
from the route construction method into the initial population of GA, which has been used as 
a route improvement method to achieve the better routes that have minimum travel cost.  
 
2.7 Reinforcement Learning  based Approaches  
RL (Reinforcement Learning) is the highly active research area in machine learning with its 
mind -blown achievements in decision making systems like robotics and gaming. Since from 
recent few years, it has gained the interest of researcher s from combinatorial optimization. 
However, compared to other field, application of reinforcement learning in combinatorial 
optimization is still few due to some of its limitations. Therefore, it becomes the potential 
research area of VRP. [9] and [10] app lied deep reinforcement learning which was the deep 
Q-network (DQN), a combination of deep learning and Q -learning for TSP and VRP 
respectively. Furthermore, RL was used as a part of other algorithms as a hybrid solution as 
in [31], [32] and [33].  
  24 
2.8 State -of-the-Art reviews on VRP variants and solutions  
This following section provides the detailed state -of-the-art reviews on both of VRP variants 
and solution approaches to address the variants.  
 
2.8.1 Review of Meta -heuristics  
The survey of [56] revie wed 299 articles published between 2009 and 2017 on the VRP 
variants , as shown in Figure 2.2  and meta -heuristics approaches , as shown in Figure 2.1 . The 
meta -heuristics were classified into two main families, namely, single -solution based 
approaches and po pulation -based approaches . Table 2.1 shows the number of occurrences of 
the VRP variants in reviewed articles  throughout the years . Table 2.2 and Table 2.3 shows 
the different types of meta -heuristics approaches used throughout the years. According to the 
figures and the tables described in [56], it shows that VRPTW and the GA are the most 
popular variant and solution approach along the review period.  

 
2.8.2 Review of Machine Learning Methods  
This section describes the review [57] of machine learning approaches to address the static 
and dynamic VRP variants. VRPTW in this research falls under the category of static VRP  
through the timeline of 2015 to 2020. Table 2.3 shows the summary of the survey. 
Reinforcement learning bloomed in the researc h field in the late 2018.    
 
 
2.8.3 Review of Model Objectives  
 
The survey of [58] reported that there are model objectives which are prioritized while 
solving the VRP variants. Figure 2.3 shows an objective to consider time window rate which 
are to be soft or hard stands third place among the others. This survey reviewed the articles 
from 2019 to 2021.  
  
 
 
This chapter is focused on the details of the improved Genetic Algorithm which has the 
problem -specific crossover and different mutations to solve the popular VRPTW instances, 
Solomon Benchma rks. 
 
3.1 Genetic Algorithm  
Genetic Algorithm  (GA)  is in the category of population -based search meta -heuristics which  
has the adaptation  of applying the principles of biological evolution, natural selection, 
recombination of the genes which inspires the s urvival of the fittest concept from Charles 
Darwin’s theory of natural evolution. This inspiration to natural evolution allows genetic 
algorithms to overcome some of the limitations of traditional search and optimization 
algorithms.   
 
[59] stated the concept that, in the bit representations of GA, GA applies implicit sampling 
to the partitions of the hyperplane in a search space. The concept is on the process of 
crossover. Individual representation in the population can be increased or decre ased by 
completing the hyperplanes. For tracking the sampling rate of hyperplane H, M(H,t) is the 
number of strings at current generation t, f(H,t) is the average evaluation of the strings in the 
population.  
 
 
 
The following concept explains the effect of  crossover at the time of new generation 
formation from current generation. Disruptive effect of crossover makes gains or losses in 
the representation although the representation of the population remains the same before the 
crossover is applied.   
 
 
 
 
A new design of crossover operator for VRP, Remove -Insert Reverse Crossover  and seven 
different mutation operators are implemented for this study. Each stage of this implemented 
GA will be explained in next sections.  
 
3.1.1  Initial Population  
Population t hat is used in GA refers to the group of individuals. The individuals are also 
referred as the chromosomes or possible solutions of the problem that is aimed to solve. Like 
a chromosome has a set of genes, the individual has a set of contents such as strin gs. With 
the help of its genetic operators such as selection, crossover and mutation, GA evolves its 
population by generations until the predefined condition for the evolution is met. After that 
the best individual or the best solution is chosen as the opt imal solution for the problem.  
 
Each individual has a representation of its contents.  Sometimes, it is called as individual 
representation. It is a representation of genes or the contents of the individual. That means 
instead of processing on the solution s directly, GA performs on the encoded solutions, known 
as representation. GA does not consider interpreting what the individual represents . This 
behavior  decouple s the search from the original domain of the problem.  
 
In this study,  permutation representation alike route representation is chosen as the 
representation  of the individuals which are used for the population of the implemented GA .  
 
Example, 1 -6-4-9-7-5-2-8 (a permutation sequence of the customer IDs in the complete 
route.) Then  the sub -routes are:   
sub-route 1: 0 -1-6-4-0 
sub-route 2: 0 -9-7-5-2-8-0 
 
Sub-routes are divided according to the constrain satisfaction such as vehicle capacity and 
time windows . Each sub -route reflects one vehicle. 0 refers to the depot.  
 
In Python programming, the representation is implemented with nested lists. That is: A route 
contains two sub -routes: [[1, 6, 4], [9, 7, 5, 2, 8]]. This kind of notation with nested lists will 
be used for the examples described in next sections. Figure 3.2 shows the simple 
representation of a population that consists of three individuals and their genes.  
 
Figure 3. 2 A simple example of individual representation  
 
 
3.1.2  Fitness Evaluation  
The obj ective function of a GA is also called as fitness function which is used to evaluate the 
fitness of each individual for the selection. In this study, it is a combination of total travel 
cost and total number of vehicles which are targeted to be minimized i n VRPTW. Individuals 
are chosen according to the evaluation of their fitness to reproduce the new offspring. 
Individuals with greater fitness values have more chance to be selected as parents to 
recombine a new offspring. As the fitness function checks the  minimum total travel cost and 
total number of vehicles in VRPTW studies, the reciprocal function in Python helps to change 
minimum value to have great fitness value to be selected.  
 
VRPTW can be considered as multiple objective optimization because it ha s to reduce the 
number of vehicles and the total distance traveled. Some researchers solved this as bi -
objective optimization by using the Pareto ranking method as in [ 50] to fairly consider both 
dimensions of the objectives. Some researchers used the weig hted sum fitness method to 
solve multiple objectives as a single objective. In this paper, weighted sum fitness that is also 
used in [ 51] is applied to evaluate the fitness of individuals because the proposed work is the 
design of  crossover and mutation to  generally minimize both objectives rather than  
considering the bias of one specific objective as in some real - world use cases. The equation 
is described as follows.  
 
Fitness = α * no. of vehicles + β * total distance travelled            (3.1)  
 
Equation 3.1 shows that α and β are the weight values for the number of vehicles and the 
total distance traveled, respectively. After the experiments with different parameter values, 
to give more priority to the cost than the number of vehicles, the weight values a re adopted 
from [50] as α = 100 and β = 0.001.  
 
3.1.3  Selection  
A selection operator is used to select the individuals  with the great fitness values  to create 
the mating pool of parents to reproduce the new offspring . For this algorithm, Tournament 
selection is used. The workflows of the tournament selection are to pick up the random n 
individuals from the population and choose one individual from them. And repeat this 
procedure from the start until meeting the number o f individuals needed for performing 
crossover. These random n individuals are called tournament set size. Here, a tournament set 
size of 4 is chosen. With tournament selection, the elitism model is also used along. Elitism 
model means the  specified number of elite individuals from the population are directly saved  33 
to the next generation without passing through the steps of crossover and mutation.  Here, the 
number of elite individuals that are directly saved to the next generation is 10.  
 
3.1.4  Crossover  
Crossover is the recombination of two individuals and produces one or two offspring as an 
output. It is known as exploitation which is good for local search. Normally, the chance to 
occur the crossover operation should be high to reproduce the good combina tions. Solving 
VRP like combinatorial optimizations needs to maintain the genes to not destroy the order 
structure. Other crossover operators like uniform crossover can happen multiple occurrences 
of genes as well as destroy the order structure. For this c ase, specifically designed crossover 
operators are required. The implemented Remove -Insert Reverse Crossover recombines the 
two parents from the selected population and provides one offspring as an output. To proceed, 
one or more consecutive sub -routes mus t be defined at Parent 1. In this paper, the number of 
sub-routes to remove is chosen randomly between 1 and the number of total sub -routes where 
1 is considered inclusively and the number of total sub - routes is considered exclusively. 
Once the set of sub -routes from the Parent 1 is defined, the removal operation is performed 
in Parent 2. All the sub -routes in the set are removed in Parent 2 elementwise. After this step 
has been completed, Parent 2 lacks some customers as they have been removed. To insert the 
removed customers back to Parent 2, the previous set of sub -routes from the Parent 1 is used. 
One sub -route from the set is sequentially chosen at a time to insert at the first index of Parent 
2. This procedure occurs until the set is empty which means  the sub -routes from the set are 
inserted in reverse order at the head part of Parent 2.  
 
The following example shows the step -by-step crossover operations. Since list notation is 
used as the data structure for performing the tasks, sub -routes within the complete route are 
described as lists inside the list. Lists are indexed starting from 0. Elements inside the lists 
are the customer IDs.  
 
Parent 1: [[8,1,2], [3,4,5], [6,7]]  
Parent 2: [[3,2,1], [4,8,5], [7], [6]]  
  34 
Index 1 and 2 of the Parent 1 are chosen as the set for the element -wise removal in Parent 2. 
Therefore,  
 
Removal Set: [[3,4,5], [6,7]]  
 
Then the elements from the set are removed in Parent 2. Therefore, Parent 2 is now appeared 
as follows.  
 
Parent 2: [[2,1], [8]]  
 
After the insertion of s ub-routes of the removal set in reverse order at the head part of Parent 
2, the final offspring is ready for the new generation.  
 
Offspring: [[6,7], [3,4,5], [2,1], [8]]  
 
 
3.1.5  Mutation  
Mutation is used to introduce the new feature to the offspring. It is known as exploration. 
This action explores globally new features to approach the optima l solutions. The chance to 
occur mutation should be few as to not destroy the good gene representations from the 
crossover stage. According to the genes representation, the mutation rate to apply the 
individual is different. For bit representation, mutatio n is the independent bit flipping rate P m 
of each individual . [60] described the mathematical notation of this as follows  where the L 
refers to the length of the population : 
 
 
 
However, in order -based representation, which is permutation representation, P m of each 
individual determines the current generation would proceed the mutation process or not. It is 
also known as the frequency for implementing the mutation process.  
 
Seven different mutation operators are considered for this GA . A mutation operator to be 
used is chosen according to a random number selected from 0 to 6. The seven mutation 
operators used in this paper are as follows.  
 
Mutation 1  
This mutation is a propos ed work of [ 50] and was also used in [ 51]. It is called Constrained 
Route Reversal Mutation. The idea of this mutation was proposed by  the author by employing 
the reversal of 2 or 3 customers in a chosen sub -route so that it reduces the route corruption. 
A reversal of several customers in a sub -route can harm the sequence of route permutation 
that the crossover operator exploited.   
 
Mutation 2   
This mutation is a heuristic -guided operation. At each sub -route, if the distance from the 
current customer to th e next customer is greater than the predefined threshold, cut off the 
customer points in the sub -route starting from that customer. Append one removed customer 
as one sub -route at the end of the complete route and stop the mutation. This is called adding 
additional heuristics by checking the distance threshold at the customer points to guide the 
algorithm to explore the new efficient features in the large solution space.  
 
Mutation 3  
At every  customer point within a complete route, under 0.1 random probabil ity, swap two 
customers at a time.  
 
Mutation 4   
At every  customer point within a complete route, under 0.02 random probability, move the 
current customer to the end of the route at a time.  
 
Mutation 5   
Shuffle within each sub -route.  
 
Mutation 6   
At every  customer point within each sub route, under 0.3 random probabilit y, swap the two  
customers which are two off sets away . 
 
Mutation 7   
Under the 0.33 random probability, at the midpoint customer of each sub -route, exchange the 
first partition and the second partition of the sub -route.  
 
 
3.2 Parameter Settings Used in the Proposed GA  
Size of individual = 100  
Size of population = 10000  
Number of predefined generations = 500  
Probability of crossover = 0.8  
Probability of mutation = 0.5  
 
The algorithm was run firstly  as 500 generations. To optimize the computing power, the 
number of generations are limited  if there is no change  in the sol ution after the current 
hundredth generation. Figure 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 shows C1, R1 and RC1 have been found the 
optimal solution by 3 00, 400 and 400 generations respectively. Figure 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 shows 
C2, R2 and RC2 have been found the optimal solution by 100 generations.    41 
Narrow Time Windows  Datasets  
 
Wide Time Windows  Datasets  
 
This chapter describes the experiment results of the proposed GA on the Solomon benchmark 
datasets of narrow time window instances such as C1, R1 and RC1, as well as  on the wide 
time window instances such as C2, R2, and RC2. Section 4.1 shows the performance 
comparison of the proposed GA and t he best -known solutions. Section 4.2 is about the 
performance comparison of the seven different mutations. And section 4.3 concludes with 
the route structure visualizations of the results.  
 
4.1 Comparison of the Proposed GA with Best -known Solutions  
Resul ts obtained from the proposed algorithm are compared with the best -known results that 
came from the previous best published studies  [50] and [51]  on VRPTW as shown in Table 
4.1 and Table 4.2. The results of the proposed GA are averaged in 3 runs. It is sho wn that the 
proposed algorithm has better performance on R sets in which the customer locations are 
randomly generated and RC sets where the mixture of R and C. Although the performance 
on C sets is still approaching to the optimum , it has the competitive results with the other 
algorithms. The bolder results show the best performance in minimization of the number of 
vehicles, or the total distance traveled.   45 
Table 4.1 Comparison  of the algorithm performance on narrow time windows instances of  
Solomon Bench mark  
 
 
Figure 4.1  shows the performance comparison of the proposed GA and BKS on each of C 
sets. As shown in the figure, BKS has slightly better solutions than the proposed GA on C 
sets. On the instances of C1, BKS has the constant value while the proposed GA has some 
fluctuations. The behavior shows the proposed GA explores the global optimum while the 
BKS has found the one. For the case of C2 instances, the proposed GA stands still as the 
BKS although the values are a bit greater than the latter. Per section 4.2, t his happ ens because 
while the BKS used the mutation 1 alone with its specific crossover , the proposed GA 
randomly chooses one mutation from the seven different mutations for a generalization.  
  49 
 
 
Figure 4.2 shows the performance comparison of the proposed GA and BKS on each of R 
sets. As shown in the figure, the proposed GA have some better solutions than BKS in R1 
sets. For R2 sets, all the solutions that the proposed GA found are better than the solutions 
from BKS. Per section 4.2, this happens because of the nature of randomly choosing one 
mutat ion from seven different mutations. Although this nature has few vulnerabilities for C 
sets as mentioned above, it has outstanding scores on R sets because it maximizes the diverse  
exploration of GA on the randomly generated customers. There is also an eff ect of mutation 
2 which is the heuristic -guided mutation , useful when the customer points are random and 
need some heuristic information for the precise exploration.  
 
 
 50 
 
 
Figure 4.2 Performance Comparison on R sets  
 
Figure 4.3 shows the performance comparison of the proposed GA and BKS on each of RC 
sets. As shown in the figure, on the instances of RC1, the proposed GA  has overall better 
solutions except very few points have the better solutions of BKS . On the RC2 set s, all the 
instances show that the proposed GA has better solutions than BKS. This overall  behavior 
shows the nature of randomly choosing one mutation from seven different mutations . RC is 
a set that is a mixture of R and C. This nature has few weaknesses in C but strong on R, so 
the result on RC shows it is a mixture of strength and weakness of the proposed GA.  
 
 
 51 
 
Figure 4.3 Performance Comparison on RC sets  
 
 
In this GA, Remove -Insert Reverse Crossover and the seven types of mutations are only used. 
On the other hand, BKS used the route repair scheme with their crossover before mutation. 
Finally, t he overall performance comparison of the proposed GA and BKS on each instance 
of Solomon Benchmark 100 custo mers  is described in Figure 4.4 as follow:  
 52 
  
Figure 4. 4 Overall Performance  Comparison  
 
 
The gap between the results of the proposed GA and Best -Known Solutions (BKS) is shown 
in Table 4.3. Results of C1 represents the average of all C1 instances. Same ap plies to C2, 
R1, R2, RC1, and RC2. It describes that BKS is slightly better than our proposed GA in C 
sets. BKS solutions are 6.41% and 13.77% better than the proposed GA on C1 and C2 
respectively. For R1 and R2, the proposed GA is 0.06% and 21.71% better than the BKS. 
Also, for RC1 and RC2, the proposed GA is 6.66% and 36.98% better than the BKS. The 
percentage values described in the Table 4.3 are calculated as Percent Error  = [ ( |BKS  value 
– Proposed GA  value| ) / BKS  value ] * 100 . Again, average  performance comparison on C1, 
C2, R1, R2, RC1, and RC2 are shown in a bar chart in Figure 4.5.  

 
Figure 4.5 Overall Performance Comparison on Average of Instances  
 
 
4.2 Performance Comparison of Seven Different Mutations  
 
Since the proposed GA used seven different mutations depending on the random probability, 
this following section analyses the performance of each mutation operator on the C sets, R 
sets and RC sets. Both of Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7 describes the separate performance  of the 
 54 
mutations in heatmap and line chart respectively. M1 to M 7 represents the mutation 1 to 
mutation 7.  
 
There is no doubt that all wide time window instance groups such as C2, R2 and RC2 have 
lower travel cost with any mutation compared to  narrow time window instances C1, R1 and 
RC1. That is because unlike narrow time window instances, wide time window instances 
have less chance to violate time constraint .  
 
The two figures show mutation 1 and mutation 6 can achieve the desirable results am ong 
seven mutations. From the perspective of time windows, m utation 1 has better performance 
on 70% of narrow time window instances: R1 and RC1 while mutation 6 has better 
performance on 70% of wide time window instances: C2 and RC2. Again , from the 
perspe ctive of customer locations, mutation 1 and mutation 2 has outstanding results on R 
sets while mutation 6 has more influence on the results of C and RC sets.  
 
Therefore, for the overall conclusion of this section, mutation 1 is good on randomly 
generated customer locations and narrow time window instances. That shows that 
Constrained Route Reversal Mutation is a good choice when the random customers have 
tight time constraints because this kind of mutation saves the route corruption as it only 
reverses the order of 2 to 3 customers in the chosen sub -route . On the other hand, mutation 6 
is good on clustered customer locations and wide time window instances.  This shows  the 
situation when the customers are clustered and, they have loose time constraints, swapp ing 
two customers that are two offsets  away in the same sub -route under the low probability rate 
can balance between exploitation and exploration as the customers are not too close but also 
just two offsets  away .   55 
 
 
Figure 4. 6 Performance of Seven Different Mutations in Proposed GA  (Heatmap)  
 
 
 
Figure 4. 7 Performance of Seven Different Mutations in Proposed GA  (Line Chart)  
 56 
 
4.3 Route Structure Visualization  
 
Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9 display the example vehicle topology of C sets: C103 and C205 
respectively. As they have clustered customer locations, the route structures show the specific 
pattern of groups. C1 sets have narrow time windows so they use more vehicles than C2 sets. 
Contrast, C2 sets use only few vehicles compared  to C1 as they have wider time frame.  
 
 
Figure 4.8 Vehicle Topology of instance C103.  
 
 
 
 57 
 
Figure 4.9 Vehicle Topology of instance C205.  
 
Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11 display the example vehicle topology of R sets: R103 and R203 
respectively. As they have randomly generated customer locations, the route structures do 
not have the specific pattern of groups. R1 sets have narrow time windows so they use more 
vehicles than R2 sets. Meanwhile, R2 sets use fewer vehicles than R1 as they have wide time 
windows.  
 
 58 
 
Figure 4.10 Vehicle Topology of instance R103.  
 59 
 
 
Figure 4.11 Vehicle Topology of instance R203.  
 
Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13 display the example vehicle topology of RC sets: RC106 and 
RC207 respectively. Since RC sets are the mixture of R and C sets, ra ndomly generated 
customer locations and clusters, the route structures are not much grouped as in C but not too 
scattered like in R. R1 sets have tight time constraints, so they must use more vehicles than 
R2 sets. Meanwhile, R2 sets use fewer vehicles tha n R1 as they have loose time constraints.  
 
 60 
 
Figure 4.12 Vehicle Topology of instance RC106.  
 
 61 
 
Figure 4.13 Vehicle Topology of instance RC207.  
 
To conclude this section 4, the overall section visualizes the route structure examples taken 
from each set of C1, C2, R1, R2, RC1 and, RC2. The distance travelled between each 
customer point in the route is calculated as Euclidean distance defined by Solomon 
Benchmark. The visualizations show t hat more vehicles are needed to solve narrow time 
window problems  (C1, R1 and RC1)  regardless of the customer locations while the wide time 
window problems  (C2, R2 and RC2)  can solve with few vehicles. That is because narrow 
time window customers have tigh t time constraints. If the vehicle violates such one constraint 
at a customer point, the customer cannot take that vehicle and need to allocate to another 
vehicle which will satisfy the customer time constraint .
 
CHAPTER 5 CONCLUSION  AND DISCUSSION FOR FUT URE 
WORK  
 
5.1 Conclusion  
In this report, state -of-the-art reviews on VRP variants and solution approaches has been 
discussed in chapter 2. It shows that the time windows variant of VRP are the fundamental 
variant s in the real -world case studies, moreover, in the solution approaches, GA still stands 
as one of the mostly used solution approaches among the classic and state -of-the-art 
approaches. This phenomenon describes the fact that the research of VRPTW with GA has 
not been dead as the new combination of g enetic operators can be found as described in 
chapter 3 of this report.  
 
To conclude this research report , the newly designed crossover which is Remove -Insert 
Reverse Crossover and the randomly chosen seven different mutations have been discussed  
for the p urpose of implementing new crossover operation and generalization of mutation 
operations which gives better results on randomly generated customer points, R sets and a 
mixture of clustered and randomly generated customer points, RC sets . Some experimental 
results are significantly improved as compared with the best -known previous work. It has 
shown that adding the provided heuristic information to the mutation phase contributes to the 
performance of the proposed GA efficiently on the R and RC sets. The prop osed GA is 
appropriate for real -world case studies like delivery systems which have customers from 
random locations rather than the clustered groups.  
 
5.2 Discussion for future work  
As mentioned above, the proposed GA has significant optimal performance on R and RC sets 
while it can also give competitive results on the C set. This phenomenon occurs as the 
randomness nature of GA on various thresholds in most of the steps of the proposed operators 
is used rather than constraining on the specifi c conditions  and also the nature of choosing 
different mutation operations at a time depending on the random probability . In the future,  63 
the performance of the algorithm can be extended  by integrating with other heuristics or 
meta -heuristics. As the trend of hybrid algorithms is also emerging nowadays, future 
contributions can be considered to modify the proposed GA into hybrid GA for obtaining the 
optimal solutions in a short time with limited resources .  
 
The well -known VRPTW real -world use cases which ca n be found from the previous reports 
consist of cash delivery for the banks [52], waste collection for the environment [53], delivery 
for the fast -food business [54] and courier service [55]. In the real -world VRP systems, 
VPRTW use cases are the fundament al and crucial case studies for most of the VRP variants. 
Therefore, in  the future, the proposed algorithm is expected to be applied in one of these real -
world scenarios  but intended for different variant like Multiple Depots VRPTW problems .   64 